<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article data-parent="dymer" id="dymer-chapter-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h3>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h3>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He woke, and all at once before his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pale spires of the chestnut-trees in bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose waving and, beyond, dove-coloured skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where he lay was dark and, out of gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw them, through the doorway of a room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of strange scents and softness, padded deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With growing leaves, heavy with last night’s sleep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He rubbed his eyes. He felt that chamber wreathing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New sleepiness around him. At his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was aware of warmth and quiet breathing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice he sank back, loose-limbed and drowsy-eyed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the wind came even there. A sparrow cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wood shone without. Then Dymer rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“Just for one glance,” he said, and went, tip-toes,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Out into crisp grey air and drenching grass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whitened cobweb sparkling in its place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clung to his feet. He saw the wagtail pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside him and the thrush: and from his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt the thin-scented winds divinely chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flush of sleep. Far off he saw, between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trees, long morning shadows of dark green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He stretched his lazy arms to their full height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yawning, and sighed and laughed, and sighed anew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wandered farther, watching with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How his broad naked footprints stained the dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Pressing his foot to feel the cold come through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the spreading toes⁠—then wheeled round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each moment to some new, shrill forest sound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The wood with its cold flowers had nothing there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More beautiful than he, new waked from sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New born from joy. His soul lay very bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That moment to life’s touch, and pondering deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now first he knew that no desire could keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These hours for always, and that men do die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—But oh, the present glory of lungs and eye!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He thought: “At home they are waking now. The stair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is filled with feet. The bells clang⁠—far from me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where am I now? I could not point to where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The City lies from here,”⁠ ⁠… then, suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I were here alone, these woods could be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A frightful place! But now I have met my friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loves me, we can talk to the road’s end.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, quickening with the sweetness of the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his new love, he turned. He saw, between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young leaves, where the palace walls showed pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chilly stone: but far above the green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springing like cliffs in air, the towers were seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making more quiet yet the quiet dawn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither he came. He reached the open lawn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No bird was moving here. Against the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the unscythed grass the nettle grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doors stood open wide, but no footfall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rang in the colonnades. Whispering through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arches and hollow halls the lights wind blew⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His awe returned. He whistled⁠—then, no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s better to plunge in by the first door.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But then the vastness threw him into doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was this the door that he had found last night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that, beneath the tower? Had he come out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This side at all? As the first snow falls light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With following rain before the year grows white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the first, dim foreboding touched his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gently as yet, and easily thrust behind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And with it came the thought, “I do not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her name⁠—no, nor her face.” But still his mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran blithely as he felt the morning blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About him, and the earth-smell in the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed waking for long hours that must be good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, in the unfettered lands, that knew no cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For grudging⁠—out of reach of the old laws.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He hastened to one entry. Up the stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the pillared porch, without delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ran⁠—then halted suddenly: for there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the quiet threshold something lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bundle, a dark mass that barred the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked again, and lo, the formless pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his eyes was moving all the while.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And it had hands, pale hands of wrinkled flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puckered and gnarled with vast antiquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That moved. He eyed the sprawling thing afresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bit by bit (so faces come to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the red coal) yet surely, he could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the swathed hugeness was uncleanly human,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A living thing, the likeness of a woman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the centre a draped hummock marked the head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence flowed the broader lines with curve and fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading as oak roots do. You would have said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man could hid among them and grow old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In finding a way out. Breast manifold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of the Ephesian Artemis might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under that robe. The face he did not see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And all his being answered, “Not that way!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never a word he spoke. Stealthily creeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back from the door he drew. Quick! No delay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick, quick, but very quiet!⁠—backward peeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till fairly out of sight. Then shouting, leaping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaking himself, he ran⁠—as puppies do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From bathing⁠—till that door was out of view.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Another gate⁠—and empty. In he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found a courtyard open to the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst it dripped a fountain. Heavy scent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers was here; the foxglove standing high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sheltered the whining wasp. With hasty eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He travelled round the walls. One doorway led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within: one showed a further court ahead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He ran up to the first⁠—a hungry lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not yet taught to endure, not blunted yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But weary of long waiting to discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loved one’s face. Before his foot was set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the first stair, he felt the sudden sweat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold on his sides. That sprawling mass in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shape⁠—the horror of heaviness⁠—here too.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He fell back from the porch. Not yet⁠—not yet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be other ways where he would meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No watcher in the door. He would not let</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fear rise, nor hope falter, nor defeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be entered in his thoughts. A sultry heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed to have filled the day. His breath came short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he passed on into that inner court.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And (like a dream) the sight he feared to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was waiting here. Then cloister, path and square</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hastened through: down paths that ended blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Traced and retraced his steps. The thing sat there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every door, still watching, everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind, ahead, all around⁠—So! Steady now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest panic comes. He stopped. He wiped his brow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, as he strove to rally, came the thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he had dreamed of such a place before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Knew how it all would end. He must be caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Early or late. No good! But all the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He raged with passionate will that overbore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knowledge: and cried out, and beat his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raving, upon the senseless walls, and said:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Where? Where? Dear, look once out. Give but one sign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s I, I, Dymer. Are you chained and hidden?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What have they done to her? Loose her! She is mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through stone and iron, haunted and hag-ridden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll come to you⁠—no stranger, nor unbidden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s I. Don’t fear them. Shout above them all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can you not hear? I’ll follow at your call.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From every arch the echo of his cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returned. Then all was silent, and he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no other way. He must pass by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That horror: tread her down, force his way through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or die upon the threshold. And this too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had all been in a dream. He felt his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beating as if his throat would burst apart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was no other way. He stood a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pondered it. Then, gathering up his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went to the next door. The pillared place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the porch was dark. The air was still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moss on the steps. He felt her presence fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The threshold with dull life. Here too was she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This time he raised his eyes and dared to see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Pah! Only an old woman!⁠ ⁠… but the size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old, old matriarchal dreadfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immovable, intolerable⁠ ⁠… the eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hidden, the hidden head, the winding dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corpselike⁠ ⁠… The weight of the brute that seemed to press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his heart and breathing. Then he heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own voice, strange and humble, take the word.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Good Mother, let me pass. I have a friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look for in this house. I slept the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feasted here⁠—it was my journey’s end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—I found it by the music and the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no one kept the doors, and I did right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To enter⁠—did I not? Now, Mother, pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me pass in⁠ ⁠… good Mother, give me way.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The woman answered nothing: but he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hands, like crabs, still wandering on her knee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mother, if I have broken any law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll ask a pardon once: then let it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Once is enough⁠—and leave the passage free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am in haste. And though it were a sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the laws you have, I must go in.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Courage was rising in him now. He said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Out of my path, old woman. For this cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am new born, new freed, and here new wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I might be the breaker of bad laws.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frost of old forbiddings breaks and thaws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherever my feet fall. I bring to birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under its crust the green, ungrudging earth.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had started, bowing low: but now he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretched to his height. His own voice in his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made misery pompous, firing all his blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Enough,” he cried. “Give place. You shall not wrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love from me. I journey on quest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You cannot understand, whose strength shall bear me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through fire and earth. A body will not scare me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I am the sword of spring; I am the truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old night, put out your stars, the dawn is here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleeper’s wakening, and the wings of youth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crumbling veneration and cowed fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I make no truce. My loved one, live and dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waits for me. Let me in! I fled the City,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I fear you or⁠ ⁠… Mother, ah, for pity.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For his high mood fell shattered. Like a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnerved, in bayonet-fighting, in the thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Full of red rum and cheers when he began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, in a dream, muttering: “I’ve not the trick.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s no good. I’m no good. They’re all too quick.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There! Look there! Look at that!”⁠—so Dymer stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly drained of hope. It was no good.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He pleaded then. Shame beneath Shame. “Forgive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be there are powers I cannot break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you are of them, speak. Speak. Let me live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask so small a thing. I beg. I make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My body a living prayer whose force would shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mountains. I’ll recant⁠—confess my sin⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this once let me pass. I must go in.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yield but one inch, once only from your law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set any price⁠—I will give all, obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All else but this, hold your least word in awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give you no cause for anger from this day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answer! The least things living when they pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I pray now bear witness. They speak true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against God. Answer! Mother, let me through.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then when he heard no answer, mad with fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with desire, too strained with both to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What he desired or feared, yet staggering near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He forced himself towards her and bent low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For grappling. Then came darkness. Then a blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell on his heart, he thought. There came a blank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things. As the dead sink, down he sank.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-3-stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The first big drops are rattling on the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sky is copper dark, low thunder pealing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See Dymer with drooped head and knocking knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes from the porch. Then slowly, drunkly reeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind, beaten, broken, past desire of healing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past knowledge of his misery, he goes on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the first dark trees and now is gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
