<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When next he found himself no house was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No garden and great trees. Beside a lane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In grass he lay. Now first he was aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, all one side, his body glowed with pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the next moment and the next again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was neither less nor more. Without a pause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It clung like a great beast with fastened claws;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That for a time he could not frame a thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor know himself for self, nor pain for pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till moment added on to moment taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The new, strange art of living on that plane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taught how the grappled soul must still remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still choose and think and understand beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very grinding of the ogre’s teeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He heard the wind along the hedges sweep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quarter striking from a neighbouring tower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About him was the weight of the world’s sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within, the thundering pain. That quiet hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heeded it not. It throbbed, it raged with power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit to convulse the heavens: and at his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soft peace drenched the meadows far and wide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The air was cold, the earth was cold with dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hedge behind him dark as ink. But now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clouds broke and a paler heaven showed through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spacious with sudden stars, breathing somehow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sense of change to slumbering lands. A cow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coughed in the fields behind. The puddles showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like pools of sky amid the darker road.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And he could see his own limbs faintly white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the blood black upon them. Then by chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He turned⁠ ⁠… and it was strange: there at his right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw a woman standing, and her glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met his: and at the meeting his deep trance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changed not, and while he looked the knowledge grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was not of the old life but the new.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Who is it?” he said. “The loved one, the long lost.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stared upon her. “Truly?”⁠—“Truly indeed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“Oh, lady, you come late. I am tempest-tossed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broken and wrecked. I am dying. Look, I bleed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why have you left me thus and given no heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all my prayer?⁠—left me to be the game</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all deceits?”⁠—“You should have asked my name.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“What are you, then?” But to his sudden cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did not answer. When he had thought awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said: “How can I tell it is no lie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may be one more phantom to beguile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brain-sick dreamer with its harlot smile.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have not smiled,” she said. The neighbouring bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tolled out another quarter. Silence fell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And after a long pause he spoke again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Leave me,” he said. “Why do you watch with me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You do not love me. Human tears and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hoping for the things that cannot be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blundering in night where none can see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And courage with cold back against the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You do not understand”⁠—“I know them all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The gods themselves know pain, the eternal forms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In realms beyond the reach of cloud, and skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nearest the ends of air, where come no storms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sound of earth, I have looked into their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peaceful and filled with pain beyond surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filled with an ancient woe man cannot reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment though in fire; yet calm their speech.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then these,” said Dymer, “were the world I wooed⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These were the holiness of lowers and grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And desolate dews⁠ ⁠… these, the eternal mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blowing the eternal theme theme through men that pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I called myself their lover⁠—I that was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less fit for that long service than the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dull, work-day drudge of men or faithful beast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Why do they lure to them such spirits as mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weak, the passionate, and the fool of dreams?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When better men go safe and never pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whisperings at the heart, soul-sickening gleams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of infinite desire, and joy that seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The promise of full power? For it was they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods themselves, that led me on this way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Give me the truth! I ask not now for pity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When gods call, can the following them be sin?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it false light that lured me from the City?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where was the path⁠—without it or within?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must it be one blind throw to lose or win?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has heaven no voice to help? Must things of dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guess their own way in the dark?” She said, “They must.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Another silence: then he cried in wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You came in human shape, in sweet disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wooing me, lurking for me in my path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hid your eternal cold with woman’s eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snared me with shows of love⁠—and all was lies.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She answered, “For our kind must come to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If bidden, but in the shape for which they call.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What!” answered Dymer. “Do you change and sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve us, as the obedient planets spin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the sun? Are you but potter’s clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For us to mould⁠—unholy to our sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And holy to holiness within?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said, “Waves fall on many an unclean shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet the salt seas are holy as before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Our nature is no purer for the saint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That worships, nor from him that uses ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our beauty can we suffer any taint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from the first we were, so are we still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With incorruptibles the moral will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corrupts itself, and clouded eyes will make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkness within from beams they cannot take.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Well⁠ ⁠… it is well,” said Dymer. “If I have used</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The embreathing spirit amiss⁠ ⁠… what would have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strength of all my days I have refused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plucked the stalk, too hasty, in the green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trusted the good for best, and having seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-beauty, or beauty’s fringe, the lowest stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The common incantation, worshipped there.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But presently he cried in his great pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I had loved a beast it would repay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have loved the Spirit and loved in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let me die⁠ ⁠… ah, but before the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is ended quite, in the last hour of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no word of comfort, no one kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human love? Does it all end in this?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She answered, “Never ask of life and death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uttering these names you dream of wormy clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or of surviving ghosts. This withering breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of words is the beginning decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In truth, when truth grows cold and pines away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the ancestral images. Your eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First see her dead: and more, the more she dies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You are still dreaming, dreams you shall forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you have cast your fetters far from here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go forth; the journey is not ended yet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have seen Dymer dead and on the bier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More often than you dream and dropped no tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have slain him every hour. Think not al all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or death lest into death by thought you fall.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He turned to question her, then looked again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! the shape was gone. The darkness lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy as yet and a cold, shifting rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell with the breeze that springs before the day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was an hour death loves. Across the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clock struck once again. He saw near by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The black shape of the tower against the sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile above the torture and the riot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of leaping pulse and nerve that shot with pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhere aloof and poised in spectral quiet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul was thinking on. The dizzied brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce seemed her organ: link by link the chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bound him to the flesh was loosening fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the new life breathed in unmoved and vast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“It was like this,” he thought⁠—“like this, or worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him that I found bleeding in the wood⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessings upon him⁠ ⁠… there I learned the curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rests on Dymer’s name, and truth was good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has forgotten now the fire and blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has forgotten that there was a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called Dymer. He knows not himself nor Bran.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“How long have I been moved at heart in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About this Dymer, thinking this was I⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why did I follow close his joy and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than another man’s? For he will die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little cloud will vanish and the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reign as before. The stars remain and earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Man, as in the years before my birth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There was a Dymer once who worked and played</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the City; I sloughed him off and ran.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a Dymer in the forest glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ranting alone, skulking the fates of man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cast him also, and a third began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he too died. But I am none of those.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there another still to die⁠ ⁠… Who knows?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then in his pain, half wondering what he did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made to struggle towards that belfried place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groaning down the sodden bank he slid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groaning in the lane he left his trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bloodied mire: then halted with his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upwards, towards the gateway, breathing hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—And old lych-gate before a burial-yard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-8-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He looked within. Between the huddling crosses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the slanted tombs and sunken slate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread the deep quiet grass and humble mosses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A green and growing darkness, drenched of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smelling of earth and damp. He reached the gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With failing hand. “I will rest here,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And the long grass will cool my burning head.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
