<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You stranger, long before your glance can light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon these words, time will have washed away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moment when I first took pen to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all my road before me—yet today,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, if at all, we meet: the unfashioned clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to both our hands; both hushed to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which is nowhere yet come forth and be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This moment, if you join me, we begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A partnership where both must toil to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clue that I caught first. We lose or win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together; if you read, you are enrolled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first, a marvel—Who could have foretold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the city which men called in scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Perfect City, Dymer could be born?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There you'd have thought the gods were smothered down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever, and the keys were turned on fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hour was left unchartered in that town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love was in a schedule and the State</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chose for eugenic reasons who should mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>WIth whom, and when. Each idle song and dnace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fixed by law and nothing left to chance.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For some of the last Platonists had founded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That city of old. And mastery they made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An island of what ought to be, surrounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this gross world of easier light and shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All answering to the master's dream they laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong foundations, torturing into stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each bubble that the Academy had blown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This people were so pure, so law-abiding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So logical, they made the heavens afraid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sent the very swallows into hiding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their appalling chastity dismayed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More soberly the lambs in spring time played</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because of them: and ghosts dissolved in shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before their common-sense—till Dymer came.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At Dymer's birth no comets scared the nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The public crêche engulfed him with the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twenty separate Boards of Education</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closed round him. He was passed through every test,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was vaccinated, numbered, washed and dressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proctored, inspected, whipt, examined weekly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for some nineteen years he bore it meekly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For nineteen years they worked upon his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refining, chipping, moulding and adorning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came the moment that undid the whole—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ripple of rude life without a warning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came in lecture-time one April morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Alas for laws and locks, reproach and praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who ever learned to censor the spring days?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A little breeze came stirring to his cheek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked up to the window. A brown bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perched on the sill, bent down to whet his beak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With darting head—Poor Dymer watched and stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uneasily. The lecturer's voice he heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still droning from the dais. The narrow room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was drowsy, over-solumn, filled with gloomm</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He yawned, and a voluptuous laziness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tingled down all this spine and loosed his knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>SLow-drawn, like an invisible caress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He laughed—The lecturer stopped like one that sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Ghost, then frowned and murmured, "Silence, please."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That moment saw the soul of Dymer hang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the balance—Louder then his laughter rang.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The whole room watched with unbelieving awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rose and staggered rising. From his lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke yet again the idiot-like guffaw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt the spirit in his finger tips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then swinging his right arm—a wide ellipse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lazily—he struck the lecturer's head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man tittered, lurched and dropt drown dead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Out of the silent room, out of the dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the sum-stream Dymer passed, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sudden breezes, the high hanging lark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The milk-white clouds sailing in polished air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly flashed about him like a blare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets. And no cry was raised behind him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His class sat dazed. They dared not go to find him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet wonderfully some rumour spread abroad—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An inarticulate sense of life renewing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In each young heart—He whistled down the road:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men said: "There's Dymer"—"Why, what's Dymer doing?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I don't know"—"Look, there's Dymer,"—far pursuing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With troubled eyes—A long mysterious "Oh"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighed from a hundred throats to see him go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Down the white street and past the gate and forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the wall he came to grassy places.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a shifting wind to West and North</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clouds in heeling squadron running races.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadows following on the sunlight's traces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crossed the whole field and each wild flower within it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>WIth change of wavering glories every minute.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was a river, flushed with rains, between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flat fields and a forest's willowy edge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sauntering pace he shuffled on the green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kicked his boots against the crackly sedge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tore his hands in many a furzy hedge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw his feet and ankles gilded round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With buttercups that carpeted the ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He looked back then. The line of a low hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had hid the city's towers and domes from sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stopt: he felt a break of sunlight spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around him sudden waves of searching light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the earth was green, and gold, and white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smothering his feet. He felt his city dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An insult to that April cheerfulness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He said: "I've worn this dust heap long enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here goes!" And forthwith in the open field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stripped away that prison of sad stuff:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Socks, jacket, shirt and breeches off he peeled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rose up mother-naked with no shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the sun: then stood awhile to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bare toes dabbling in cold river clay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Forward again, and sometimes leaping high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With arms outspread as though he would embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one act all the circle of the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes he rested in a leafier place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crushed the wet, cool flowers against his face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once he cried aloud, "Oh world, oh day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let, let me,"—and then found no prayer to say.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Up furrows still unpierced with earliest crop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He marched. Through woods he strolled from flower to flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over hills. As ointment drop by drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preciously meted out, so hour by hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day slipped through his hands: and now the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Failed in his feet from walking. He was done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hungry and cold. That moment sank the sun.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He lingered—Looking up, he saw ahead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The black and bristling frontage of a wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over it the large sky swimming red</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freckled with homeward crows. Surprised he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel that wideness quenching his hot mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shouted, "Trembling darkness, trembling green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What do you mean, wild wood, what do you mean?"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He shouted. But the solitude received</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His noise into her noiselessness, his fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into her calm. Perhaps he half believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some answer yet would come to his desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hushed air quivered softly like a wire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his voice. It echoed, it was gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quiet and the quiet dark went on.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He rushed into the wood. He struck and stumbled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On hidden roots. He grouped and scratched his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little birds woke chattering where he fumbled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stray cat stood, paw lifted, in mid-chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a windless calm in such a place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sense of being indoors—so crowded stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living trees, watching on every hand:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A sense of trespass—such as in the hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wrong house, one time, to me befell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groping between the hatstand and the wall—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A clear voice from above me like a bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sweet voice of a woman asking "Well?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more than this. And as I fled I wondered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into whose alien story I had blundered.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A like thing fell to Dymer. Bending low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeling his way he went. The curtained air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighed into sound above his head, as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stringed instruments and horns were riding there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It passed and at its passing stirred his hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood intent to hear. He heard again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And checked his breath half-drawn, as if with pain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That music could have crumbled proud belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With doubt, or in the bosom of the sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madden the heart that had outmastered grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flood with tears the eyes of frozen age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn the young man's feet to pilgrimage—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sharp it was, so sure a path it found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soulward with stabbing wounds of bitter sounds.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It died out on the middle of a note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though it failed at the urge of its own meaning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It left him with life quivering at the throat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Limbs shaken and wet cheeks and body leaning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With strain towards the sound and senses gleaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last, least, ebbing ripple of the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Searching the emptied darkness, muttering "Where?"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then followed such a time as is forgotten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With morning light, but in the passing seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unending. Where he grasped the branch was rotten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he trod forth in haste the forest streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid wait for him. Like men in fever dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Climbing an endless rope, he laboured much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gained no ground. He reached and could not touch.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And often out of darkness like a swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That grows up from no wind upon blue sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard the music, unendurable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In stealing sweetness wind from tree to tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Battered and bruised in body and soul was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first he saw a little lightness growing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ahead: and from that light the sound was flowing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-28">
				<head>
					<p>28</p>
				</head>
				<p>
					<span>The trees were fewer now: and gladly nearing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That light, he saw the stars. For sky was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smoother grass, white flowered—a forest clearing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set in seven miles of forest, secreter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than valleys in the tops of clouds, more fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than greenery under snow or desert water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the white peace descending after slaughter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As some who have been wounded beyond healing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wake, or half wake, once only and so bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off the lamplight travelling on the ceiling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A disk of pale light filled with peacefulness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder if this is the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">C.C.S.</abbr>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or home, or heaven, or dreams—then sighing win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise, ignorant death before the pains begin:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Dymer in the wood-lawn blessed the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A still light, rosy, clear, and filled with sounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here was some pile of building which the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made larger. Spiry shadows rose all round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through the open door appeared profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recesses of pure light—fire with no flame—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out of that deep light the music came.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Tip-toes he slunk towards it where the grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was twinkling in a lane of light before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The archway. There was neither fence to pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor word of challenge given, nor bolted door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where it's open, open evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No knocker and no porter and no guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very strangeness entering in grows hard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-1-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Breath not! Speak not! Walk gently. Someone's here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why have they left heir house with the door so wide?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be someone… Dymer hung in fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the threshold, longing and big-eyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last he squared he shoulders, smote his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And called, "I'm here. Now let the feast begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I'm coming now. I'm Dymer," and went in.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
