<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>First came the peal that split the heavens apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight overhead. Then silence. Then the rain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve miles of downward water like one dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in one leap were launched along the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break the budding flower and flood the grain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep with dripping sound an undersong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the wheeling thunder all might long.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He put his hands before his face. He stooped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind with hi hair. The loud drops’ grim tattoo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beat him to earth. Like summer grass he dropped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed, while sheeted lightning large and blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blinked wide and pricked and quivering eyeball through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, scrambling to his feet, with downward head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fought into the tempest as chance led.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The wood was mad. Soughing of branch and straining</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was there: drumming of water. Light was none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor knowledge of himself. The trees’ complaining</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his own throbbing heart seemed mixed in one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sense of bitter loss and beauty undone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All else was blur and chaos and rain-stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And noise and the confusion of a dream.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aha!⁠ ⁠… Earth hates a miserable man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against him even the clouds and winds conspire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s voice smote Dymer’s ear-drum as he ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its red throat plagued the dark with corded fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Barbed flame, coiled flame that ran like living wire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charged with disastrous current, left and right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his path, hell-blue or staring white.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Stab! Stab! Blast all at once. What’s he to fear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look there⁠—that cedar shrivelling in swift blight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even where he stood! And there⁠—ah, that came near!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, if some shaft would break his soul outright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ease so to unload and scatter quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the darkness this wild beating in his skull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too burning to endure, too tense and full.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All lost: and driven away: even her name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknown. O fool, to have wasted for a kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time when they could have talked! An angry shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in him. He had worshipt earth, and this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—The venomed clouds fire spitting from the abyss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was the truth indeed, the world’s intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmasked and naked now, the thing it meant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The storm lay on the forest a great time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Wheeled in its thundery circuit, turned, returned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still through the dead-leaved darkness, through the slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of standing pools and slots of clay storm-churned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went Dymer. Still the knotty lightning burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along black air. He heard the unbroken sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of water rising in the hollower ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He cursed it in his madness, flung it back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow as wild as young men’s sorrows are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, after midnight, when the tempest’s track</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew off, between two clouds appeared one star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then his mood changed. And this was heavier far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When bit by bit, rarer and still more rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weakening thunder ceased from the cleansed air;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the leaves began to drip with dying rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trees showed black against the glimmering sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the night-birds flapped out and called again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above him: when the silence cool and shy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came stealing to its own, and streams ran by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now audible amid the rustling wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Oh, then came the worst hour for flesh and blood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was no nightmare now with fiery stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too horrible to last, able to blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself and all things in one hurrying dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was the waking world that will not end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because hearts break, that is not foe nor friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sane and settled knowledge first appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of work-day desolation, with no tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He halted then, foot-sore, weary to death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard his heart beating in solitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When suddenly the sound of sharpest breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indrawn with pain and the raw smell of blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surprised his sense. Near by to where he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came a long whimpering moan⁠—a broken word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rustle of leaves where some live body stirred.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapater-4-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He groped towards the sound. “What, brother, brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who groaned?”⁠—“I’m hit. I’m finished. Let me be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“Put out your hand, then. Reach me. No, the other.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“Don’t touch. Fool! Damn you! Leave me.”⁠—“I can’t see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are you?” Then more groans. “They’ve done for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve no hands, Don’t come near me. No, but stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don’t leave me⁠ ⁠… O my God! Is it near day?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“Soon now, a little longer. Can you sleep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll watch for you.”⁠—“Sleep, is it? That’s ahead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But none till then. Listen: I’ve beld too depp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To last out till the morning. I’ll be dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the hour⁠—sleep then. I’ve heard it said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They don’t mind at the last, but this is Hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I’d the strength⁠—I have such things to tell.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All trembling in the dark and sweated over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a man reared in peace, unused to pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat Dymer near him in the lightless cover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afraid to touch and shamefaced to refrain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then bit by bit and often checked again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With agony the voice told me. (The place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was darked, that neither saw the other’s face.)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There is a City which men call is scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Perfect City⁠—eastward of this wood⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ve heard about the place. There I was born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m one of them, their work. Their sober mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ordered life, the laws, are in my blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—A life⁠ ⁠… well, less than happy, something more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the red greed and lusts that went before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All in one day, one man an at one blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought ruin on us all. There was a boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Blue eyes, large limbs, were all he had to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You need no greater prophets to destroy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seemed a man asleep. Sorrow and joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had passed him by⁠—the dreamiest, safest man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most obscure, until this curse began.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then⁠—how or why it was, I cannot say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Dymer, this fool baby pink-and-white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went mad beneath his quiet face. One day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nothing said, he rose and laughed outright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his master: then, in all our sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even where we sat to watch, he struck him dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And screamed with laughter once again and fled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Lord! how it all comes back. How still the place is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he there lying dead⁠ ⁠… only the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a bluebottle buzzing⁠ ⁠… sharpened faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strained, gaping from the benches all around⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dead man hunched and quiet with no wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And minute after minute terror creeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dreadful hopes to set the wild heart leaping.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then one by one at random (no word spoken)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We slipt out to the sunlight and away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We felt the empty sense of something broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And comfortless adventure all that day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men loitered at their work and could not say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What trembled at their lips or what new light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in girls’ eyes. Yet we endured till night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then⁠ ⁠… I was lying awake in bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot through with tremulous thought, lame hopes, and sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire of reckless days⁠—with burning head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then there came a clamour from the street,j</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came nearer, nearer, nearer⁠—stamping feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And screaming song and curses and a shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ‘Who’s for Dymer, Dymer?⁠—Up and out!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We looked out from our window. Thronging there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand of our people, girls and men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raved and reviled and shouted by the glare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of torches and bonfire blaze, And then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came tumult from the street beyond: again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Dymer!’ they cried. And farther off there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sound of gun-fire and the gleam of flame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I rushed down with the rest. Oh, we were mad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After this, it’s all nightmare. The black sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the housetops framed was all we had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell us that the old world could not die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that we were no gods. The flood ran high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first I came, but after was the worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, to recall⁠ ⁠… ! On Dymer rest the curse!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Our leader was a hunchback with red hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Bran was his name. He had that kind of force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About him that will hold your eyes fast there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in ten miles of green one patch of gorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will hold them⁠—do you know? His lips were coarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his eyes like a prophet’s⁠—seemed to fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole face. And his tongue was never still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He cried: ‘As Dymer broke, we’ll break the chain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world is free. They taught you to be chaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And labour and bear orders and refrain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refrain? From what? All’s good enough. We’ll taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever is. Life murmurs from the waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the mind⁠ ⁠… who made the reasoning part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The jailer of the wild gods in the heart?’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We were a ragtail crew⁠—wild-haired, half-dressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All shouting, ‘Up, for Dymer! Up away!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet each one always watching all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking to his back. And some were gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like drunk man, some were cringing, pinched and grey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With terror dry on the lip. (The older ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had had the sense enough to bring their guns.)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The wave where I was swallowed swelled and broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After long surge, into the open square.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here there was more light: new clamour woke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here first I heard the bullets sting the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went hot round the heart. Our lords were there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In barricade with all their loyal men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every one man loyal Bran led ten.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then charge and cheer and bubbling sobs of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hovered on their front. Like swarming bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their spraying bullets came⁠—no time for breath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw men’s stomachs fall out on their knees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shouting faces, while they shouted, freeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into black, bony masks. Before we knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’re into them⁠ ⁠… ‘Swine!’⁠—‘Die, then’⁠—‘That’s for you.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The next that I remember was a lull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sated pause. I saw an old, old man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lying before my feet with shattered skull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both my arms dripped red. And then came Bran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at his heels a hundred murderers ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With prisoners now, clamouring to take and try them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burn them, wedge their nails up, crucify them.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“God!⁠ ⁠… Once the lying spirit of a cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With maddening words dethrones the mind of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re past the reach of prayer. The eternal laws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hate them. Their eyes will not come clean again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But doom and strong delusion drive them then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without ruth, without rest⁠ ⁠… the iron laughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the immortal mouths goes hooting after.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And we had firebrands too. Tower after tower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell sheathed in thundering flame. The street was like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A furnace mouth. We had them in our power!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was the time to mock them and to strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To flay men and spit women on the pike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding them dance. Wherever the most shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was done the doer called on Dymer’s name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Faces of men in torture⁠ ⁠… from my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will not go away. The East lay still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In darkness when we left the town behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flaming to light the fields. We’d had our will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sang, ‘Oh, we will make the frost distil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Time’s grey forehead into living dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And break whatever has been and build new.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Day found us on the border of this wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blear-eyed and pale. Then the most part began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To murmur and to lag, crying for food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shelter. But we dared not answer Bran.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherever in the ranks the murmur ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’d find it⁠—‘You, there, whispering. Up, you sneak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reactionary, eh? Come out and speak.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then there’d be shrieks, a pistol shot, a cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And someone down. I was the third he caught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The others pushed me out beneath his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying, ‘He’s here; here, Capture.’ Who’d have thought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My old friends? But I know now. I’ve been taught⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cut away my two hands and my feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laughed and left me for the birds to eat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, God’s name! If I had my hands again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dymer here⁠ ⁠… it would not be my blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am stronger now than he is, old with pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One grip would make him mine. But it’s no good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m dying fast. Look stranger, where the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows lighter. It’s the morning. Stranger dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don’t leave me. Talk a little while. Come near.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-4-stanza-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Dymer, sitting hunched with knee to chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to the dying man, answered no word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face was stone. There was no meaning in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wakeful eyes. Sometimes the other stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fretted, near his death; and Dymer heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet sat like one that neither hears nor sees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the cold East whitened beyond the trees.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
