<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sun was high in heaven and Dymer stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bright speck on the endless mountain-side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, blossom after blossom, that rich mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded and truth rolled homeward, like a tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose edge the weak soul fled to hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain, with ostrich head, through many a shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of coward fancy, whimpering for escape.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But only for a moment; then his soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took the full swell and heaved a dripping prow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear of the shattering wave-crest. He was whole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No veils should hide the truth, no truth should cow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dear self-pitying heart. “I’ll babble now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer,” Dymer said. “I’m broken in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pack up the dreams and let the life begin.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With this he turned. “I must have food to-day,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He muttered. Then among the cloudless hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By winding tracks he sought the downward way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And followed the steep course of tumbling rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Came to the glens the wakening mountain fills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In springtime with the echoing splash and shock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of waters leaping cold from rock to rock.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And still, it seemed that lark with its refrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang in the sky, and wind was in his hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hope at heart. Then once, and once again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard a gun fired off. It broke the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a stone breaks a pond, and everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dry crags echoed clear: and at the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once a big bird rose whirring from the ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In half an hour he reached the level land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And followed the field-paths and crossed the stiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then looked and saw, near by, on his left hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An old house, folded round with billowy piles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dark yew hedge. The moss was on the tiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pigeons in the yard, and in the tower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A clock that had no hands and told no hour.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He hastened. In warm waves the garden scent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came stronger at each stride. The mountain breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was gone. He reached the gates; then in he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seemed to lose the sky⁠—such weight of trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung overhead. He heard the noise of bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw, far off, in the blue shade between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The windless elms, one walking on the green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was a mighty man whose beardless face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath grey hair shone out so large and mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made a sort of moonlight in the place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dreamy desperation, wistful-wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showed in his glance and gait: yet like a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An Asian emperor’s only child, was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his grave looks and bright solemnity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And over him there hung in the witching air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wilful courtesy, of the days of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The graces wherein idleness grows fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And somewhat in his sauntering walk he rolled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And toyed about his waist with seals of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or stood to ponder often in mid-stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tilting his heavy head upon one side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Dymer had called twice, he turned his eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, coming out of silence (as a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in one moment slips into the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of evening, yet we feel it comes from far),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, “Sir, you are welcome. Few there are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That come my way”: and in huge hands he pressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dymer’s cold hand and bade him into rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“How did you find this place out? Have you heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gun? It was but now I killed a lark.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What, Sir,” said Dymer; “shoot the singing bird?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir,” said the man, “they sing from dawn till dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And interrupt my dreams too long. But hark⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another? Did you hear no singing? No?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was my fancy, then⁠ ⁠… pray, let it go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“From here you see my garden’s only flaw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand here, Sir, at the dial.” Dymer stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Master pointed; then he looked and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How hedges and the funeral quietude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of black trees fringed the garden like a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only, in one place, one gap that showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blue side of the hills, the white hill-road.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I have planted fir and larch to fill the gap,”<br/></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, “because this too makes war upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The art of dream. But by some great mishap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing I plant will grow there. We pass on⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sunshine of the afternoon is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us go in. It draws near time to sup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—I hate the garden till the moon is up.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They passed from the hot lawn into the gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And coolness of the porch: then, past a door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That opened with no noise, into a room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where green leaves choked the window and the floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sank lower than the ground. A tattered store.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brown books met the eye: a crystal ball:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And masks with empty eyes along the wall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then Dymer sat, but knew not how nor where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And supper was set out before these two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—He saw not how⁠—with silver old and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tarnished. And he ate and never knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What meats they were. At every bite he grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More drowsy and let slide his crumbling will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Master at his side was talking still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And all his talk was tales of magic words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the nations in the clouds above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astral and aerish tribes who fish for birds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With angles. And by history he could prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How chosen spirits from earth had won their love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Arthur, or Usheen: and to their isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went Helen for the sake of a Greek smile.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And ever in his talk he mustered well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His texts and strewed old authors round the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thus Wierus writes,” and “Thus the Hermetics tell,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This was Agrippa’s view,” and “Others say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Cardan,” till he had stolen quite away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dymer’s dull wits and softly drawn apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ivory gates of hope that change the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dymer was talking now. Now Dymer told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his own love and losing, drowsily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Master leaned towards him, “Was it cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This spirit, to the touch?”⁠—“No, Sir, not she,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Dymer. And his host: “Why this must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aethereal, not aerial! O my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be still⁠ ⁠… but wait. Tell on, Sir, tell the whole.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then Dymer told him of the beldam too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old, old, matriarchal dreadfulness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the Master’s face a shadow drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shifted in his chair and “Yes” and “Yes,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He murmured twice. “I never looked for less!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always the same⁠ ⁠… that frightful woman shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besets the dream-way and the soul’s escape.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now when Dymer made to talk of Bran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A huge indifference fell upon his host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patient and wandering-eyed. Then he began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Forgive me. You are young. What helps us most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to find out again that heavenly ghost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loves you. For she was a ghost, and you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that place where you met were ghostly too.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Listen! for I can launch you on the stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will roll you to the shores of her own land⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could be sworn you never learned to dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every night you take with careless hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What chance may bring? I’ll teach you to command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comings and the goings of your spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all that borderland which dreams inherit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You shall have hauntings suddenly. And often,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you forget, when least you think of her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For so you shall forget), a light will soften</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the evening woods. And in the stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of morning dreams (oh, I will teach you, Sir)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’ll come a sound of wings. Or you shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waked in the midnight murmuring, ‘It was she.’ ”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“No, no,” said Dymer, “not that way. I seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have slept for twenty years. Now⁠—while I shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of my eyes that dust of burdening dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now when the long clouds tremble ripe to break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the far hills appear, when first I wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still blinking, struggling towards the world of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And longing⁠—would you turn me back again?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Dreams? I have had my dream too long. I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun rose for my sake. I ran down blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dancing to the abyss. Oh, Sir, I brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boy-laughter for a gift to gods who find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The martyr’s soul too soft. But that’s behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m waking now. They broke me. All ends thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always⁠—and we’re for them, not they for us.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And she⁠—she was no dream. It would be waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seek her there, the living in that den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lies.” The Master smiled. “You are in haste!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For broken dreams the cure is, Dream again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deeper. If the waking world, and men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nature marred your dream⁠—so much the worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a crude world beneath its primal curse.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“Ah, but you do not know! Can dreams do this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck out blood-guiltiness upon the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or memory⁠—and undo what’s done amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid the thing that has been be no more?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“Sir, it is only dreams unlock that door,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answered with a shrug. “What would you have?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dreams the thrice-proved coward can feel brave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In dreams the fool is free from scorning voices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grey-headed whores are virgin there again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the past dream brings long-buried choices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in a moment snaps the tenfold chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That life took years in forging. There the stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of oldest sins⁠—how do the good words go?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they were scarlet, shall be white as snow.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, drawing near, when Dymer did not speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My little son,” said he, “your wrong and right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are also dreams: fetters to bind the weak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faster to phantom earth and blear the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wake into dreams, into the larger light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That quenches these frail stars. They will not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth’s bye-laws in the land to which you go.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“I must undo my sins.”⁠—“An earthly law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, even in earth, the child of yesterday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw down your human pity; cast your awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind you; put repentance all away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home to the elder depths! for never they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supped with the stars who dared not slough behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last shred of earth’s holies from their mind.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sir,” answered Dymer, “I would be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drudge in earth, easing my heart’s disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counting a year’s long service lightly spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If once at the year’s end I saw her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhere, being then most weary, in some place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked not for that joy⁠—or heard her near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering, ‘Yet courage, friend,’ for one more year.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Pish,” said the Master. “Will you have the truth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You think that virtue saves? Her people care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the high heart and idle hours of youth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these they will descend our lower air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not virtue. You would nerve your arm and bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your burden among men? Look to it, child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By virtue’s self vision can be defiled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You will grow full of pity and the love of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And toil until the morning moisture dries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of your heart. Then once, or once again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be you will find her: but your eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon will be grown too dim. The task that lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next to your hand will hide her. You shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The child of earth and gods you shall not see.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here suddenly he ceased. Tip-toes he went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bolt clicked⁠—then the window creaked ajar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out of the wet world the hedgerow scent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came floating; and the dark without one star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shape of trees nor sense of near and far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The undimensioned night and formless skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were there, and were the Master’s great allies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I am very old,” he said. “But if the time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We suffer in our dreams were counted age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have outlived the ocean and my prime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is with me to this day. Years cannot gauge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dream-life. In the turning of a page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dozing above my book, I have lived through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More ages than the lost Lemuria knew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I am not mortal. Were I doomed to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hour, in this half-hour I interpose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand years of dream: and, those gone by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many more, and in the last of those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten thousand⁠—ever journeying towards a close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall never reach: for time shall flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheel within wheel, interminably slow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And you will drink my cup and go your way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the valley of dreams. You have heard the call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come hither and escape. Why should you stay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth is a sinking ship, a house whose wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is tottering while you sweep; the roof will fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the work is done. You cannot mend it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patch as you will, at last the rot must end it.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-6-stanza-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then Dymer lifted up his heavy head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Atlas on broad shoulders bearing up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The insufferable globe. “I had not said,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mumbled, “never said I’d taste the cup.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, is it this you give me? Must I sup?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, lies, all lies⁠ ⁠… Why did you kill the lark?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guide me the cup to lip⁠ ⁠… it is so dark.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
