<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>More light. Another step, and still more light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opening ahead. It swilled with soft excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes yet quivering from the dregs of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it was nowhere more and nowhere less:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In it no shadows were. He could not guess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its fountain. Wondering round around he turned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still no each side the level glory burned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Far into the dome to where his gaze was lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deepening roof shone clear as stones that lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In-shore beneath pure seas. The aisles, that crossed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like forests of white stone their arms on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past pillar after pillar dragged his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In unobscured perspective till the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was weary. And there also was the light.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Look with my eyes. Conceive yourself above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hanging in the dome: and thence through space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look down. See Dymer, dwarfed and naked, move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A white blot on the floor, at such a pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As boats that hardly seem to have changed place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once in an hour when from the cliffs we spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same ship always smoking towards the sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The shouting mood had withered from his heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The oppression of huge places wrapped him round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great misgiving sent its fluttering dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep into him⁠—some fear of being found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hope to find he knew not what. The sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of music, never ceasing, took the rôle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silence and like silence numbed his soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Till, as he turned a corner, his deep awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke with a sudden start. For straight ahead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off, a wild eyed, naked man he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That came to meet him: and beyond was spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet further depth of light. With quickening tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaped towards the shape. Then stopped and smiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before a mirror, wondering like a child.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-6">
				<heading>
					<p>6</p>
				</heading>
				<p>
					<span>Beside the glass, unguarded, for the claiming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a great patch of lowers upon the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung every kind of clothes: silk, feathers flaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leopard skin, furry mantles like the fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deep mid-winter snows. Upon them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung the faint smell of cedar, and the dyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were bright as blood and clear as morning skies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-7">
				<heading>
					<p>7</p>
				</heading>
				<p>
					<span>He turned from the white spectre in the glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looked at these. Remember, he had worn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ winter slush, thro’ summer flowers and grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One kind of solemn stuff since he was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With badge of year and rank. He laughed in score</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cried, “Here is no law, nor eye to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor leave of entry given. Why should there be?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Have done with that⁠—you threw it all behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henceforth I ask no licence where I need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s on, on, on, though I go mad and blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though knees ache and lungs labour and feet bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else⁠—it’s home again: to sleep and feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And work, and hate them always and obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loathe the punctual rise of each new day.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He made mad work among them as he dressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With motley choice and litter on the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each thing as he found it seemed the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wondered that he had not known before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How fair a man he was. “I’ll creep no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In secret,” Dymer said. “But I’ll go back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drive them all to freedom on this track.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He turned towards the glass. The space looked smaller</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind him now. Himself in royal guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filled the whole frame⁠—a nobler shape and taller,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till suddenly he started with surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catching by chance, his own familiar eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fevered, yet still the same, without their share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bravery, undeceived and watching three.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, as he turned, he cried, “The rest remain⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they rebelled⁠ ⁠… if they should find me here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’d pluck the whole taut fabric from the strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hew down the city, let live earth appear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Old men and barren women whom through fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have suffered to be masters in our home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hide! hide! for we are angry and we come.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus feeding on vain fancy, covering round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hunger, his great loneliness arraying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In facile dreams until the qualm was drowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boy went on. Through endless arches straying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With casual tread he sauntered, manly playing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At manhood lest more loss of faith betide him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till lo! he saw a table set beside him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Dymer saw this sight, he leaped for mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He clapped his hands, his eye lit like a lover’s.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had a hunger in him that was worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten cities. Here was silver, glass and covers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold peacock, prawns in aspic, eggs of plovers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raised pies that stood like castles, gleaming fishes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bright fruit with broad leaves around the dishes.1</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If ever you have passed a café door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lingered in the dusk of a June day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh from the road, sweat-sodden and foot-sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard the plates clink and the music play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With laughter, with white tables far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many lights⁠—conceive how Dymer ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To table, looked once round him, and began.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That table seemed unending. Here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were broken meats, bread crumbled, flowers defaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—A napkin, with white petals, on a chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—A glass already tasted, still to taste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed that a great host had fed in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gone: yet left a thousand places more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untouched, wherein no guest had sat before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There in the lonely splendour Dymer ate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thieves eat, ever watching, half in fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He blamed his evil fortune. “I come late.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose board was this? What company sat here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What women with wise mouths, what comrades dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would have made me welcome as the one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free-born of all my race and cried, ‘Well done!’ ”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Remember, yet again, he had grown up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On rations and on scientific food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At common boards, with water in his cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One mess alike for every day and mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here, at his right hand, a flagon stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He raised it, paused before he drank, and laughed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’ll drown their Perfect City in this draught.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He fingered the cold neck. He saw within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a strange sky, some liquor that foamed blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmured. Standing now with pointed chin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And head thrown back, he tasted. Rapture flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through every vein. That moment louder grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The music and swelled forth a trumpet note.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ceased and put one hand up to his throat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then heedlessly he let the flagon sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his right hand. His staring eyes were caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In distance, as of one who tries to think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thought that is still waiting to be thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a riot in his heart that brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loud blood to the temples. A great voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprang to his lips unsummoned, with no choice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! but the eyes are open, the dream is broken!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sack the Perfect City?⁠ ⁠… a fool’s deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Dymer! Folly of follies I have spoken!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am the wanderer, new born, newly freed⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand times they have warned me of men’s greed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For joy, for the good that all desire, but never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till now I knew the wild heat of the endeavour.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Some day I will come back to break the City,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Not now. Perhaps when age is white and bleak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Not now. I am in haste. O God, the pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my life till this, groping and weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadow of itself! But now to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That true most ancient glory whose white glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was lost through the whole world by evil chance!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I was a dull, cowed thing from the beginning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dymer the drudge, the blackleg who obeyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire shall teach me now. If this be sinning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good luck to it! O splendour long delayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful world of mine, O world arrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bridal, flower and forest, wave and field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I come to be your lover. Loveliest, yield!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“World, I will prove you. Lest it should be said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was man who loved the earth: his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was nothing but that love. With doing tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He worshipt the loved grass: and every start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every bird from cover, the least part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every flower he hold in awe. Yet earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave him no joy between his death and birth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I know my good is hidden at your breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a sound of great good in my ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like wings. And, oh! this moment is the best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not fail⁠—I taste it⁠—it comes near.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As men from a dark dungeon see the clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stars shining and the filled streams far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear your promise booming and obey.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This forest lies a thousand miles, perhaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond where I am come. And farther still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rivers wander seaward with smooth lapse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there is cliff and cottage, tower and hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhere, before the world’s end, I shall fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit at earth’s pap. For earth must hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One rich thing sealed as Dymer’s from of old.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“One rich thing⁠—or, it may be, more than this⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might I not reach the borders of a land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ought to have been mine? And there, the bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of free speech, there the eyes that understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men free grown, not modelled by the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of masters⁠—men that know, or men that seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—They will not gape and murmur when I speak.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, as he ceased, amid the farther wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw a curtained and low lintelled door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Dark curtains, sweepy fold, night-purple pall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought he had not noticed it before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sudden desire for darkness overbore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His will, and drew him towards it. All was blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within. He passed. The curtains closed behind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He entered a void. Night-scented flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathed there, but this was darker than the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is most black with beating thunder-showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—A disembodied world where depth and height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And distance were unmade. No seam of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showed through. It was a world not made for seeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One pure, one undivided sense of being.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Through darkness smooth as amber, warily, slowly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He moved. The floor was soft beneath his feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cool smell that was holy and unholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharp like the very spring and roughly sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blew towards him: and he felt his fingers meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broad leaves and wiry stems that at his will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unclosed before and closed behind him still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With body intent he felt the foliage quiver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On breast and thighs. With groping arms he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide passes in the air. A sacred shiver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy from the heart’s centre oddly strayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every nerve. Deep sighing, much afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much wondering, he went on: then, stooping, found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A knee-depth of warm pillows on the ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And there it was sweet rapture to lie still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyes open on the dark. A flowing health</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathed him from head to foot and great goodwill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose springing in his heart and poured its wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outwards. Then came a hand as if by stealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the dark and touched his hand: and after</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beating silence budded into laughter:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—A low grave laugh and rounded like a pearl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mysterious, filled with home. He opened wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arms. The breathing body of a girl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slid into them. From the world’s end, with the stride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of seven-leagued boots came passion to his side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, meeting mouths, soft-falling hair, a cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart-shaken flank, sudden cool-folded thigh:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-2-stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The same nights swelled the mushroom in earth’s lap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silvered the wet fields: it drew the bud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hiding and led on the rhythmic sap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent the young wolves thirsting after blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, wheeling the big seas, made ebb and flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the shores of earth: and held these two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dead sleep till the time of morning dew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
