<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The host had trimmed his lamp. The downy moth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came from the garden. Where the lamplight shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its circle of smooth white upon the cloth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down mid the rinds of fruit and broken bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his sprawling arms lay Dymer’s Head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often, as he dreamed, he shifted place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muttering and showing half his drunken face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The beating stillness of the dead of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flooded the room. The dark and sleepy powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Settled upon the house and filled it quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the roads it lay, from belfry towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hen-roosts, in a world of folded flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buried in loneliest fields where beasts that love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silence through the unrustled hedgerows move.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now from the Master’s lips there breathed a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a man released from some control</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wronged him. Without aim his wandering eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsteadied and unfixed, began to roll.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lower lip dropped loose. The informing soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed fading from his face. He laughed out loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once only: then looked round him, hushed and cowed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, summoning all himself, with tightened lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With desperate coolness and attentive air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He touched between his thumb and finger-tip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each in its turn, the four legs of his chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then back again in haste⁠—there!⁠—that one there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been forgotten⁠ ⁠… once more!⁠ ⁠… safer now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s better! and he smiled and cleared his brow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet this was but a moment’s ease. Once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He glanced about him like a startled hare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His big eyes bulged with horror. As before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick!⁠—to the touch that saves him. But despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is nearer by one step; and in his chair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huddling he waits. He knows that they’ll come strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again and yet again and all night long;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, after this night comes another night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Night after night until the worst of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now too even the noonday and the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let through the horrors. Oh, could he recall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deep sleep and the dreams that used to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around him for the asking! But, somehow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something’s amiss⁠ ⁠… sleep comes so rarely now.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, like the dog returning to its vomit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He staggered to the bookcase to renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet once again the taint he had taken from it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shuddered as he went. But horrors come drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feet, as joy draws others. There in view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was his strange heaven and his far stranger hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His secret lust, his soul’s dark citadel:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Old Theomagia, Demonology,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cabbala, Chemic Magic, Book of the Dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Damning Hermetic rolls that none may see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save the already damned⁠—such grubs are bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From minds that lose the Spirit and seek instead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For spirits in the dust of dead men’s error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buying the joys of dream with dreamland terror.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This lost soul looked them over one and all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now sickening at the heart’s root; for he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This night was one of those when he would fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scream alone (such things they made him do)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roll upon the floor. The madness grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild at his breast, but still his brain was clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he could watch the moment coming near.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere it came, he heard a sound, half groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half muttering, from the table. Like a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught unawares that thought it was alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He started as in guilt, His gaze was wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet pitiably with all his will he smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—So strong is shame, even then. And Dymer stirred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now waking, and looked up and spoke one word:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Water!” he said. He was too dazed to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hell-wrung face looked down, what shaking hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poured out the draught. He drank it thirstily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And held the glass for more. “Your land⁠ ⁠… your land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dreams,” he said. “All lies!⁠ ⁠… I understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than I did. Yes, water. I’ve the thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hell itself. Your magic’s all accursed.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When he had drunk again he rose and stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pallid and cold with sleep. “By God,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You did me wrong to send me to that wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sought a living spirit and found instead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bogies and wraiths.” The Master raised his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calm as a sage, and answered, “Are you mad?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, sit you down. Tell me what dream you had.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“I dreamed about a wood⁠ ⁠… an autumn red</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beech-trees big as mountains. Down between⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first thing that I saw⁠—a clearing spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep down, oh, very deep. Like some ravine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like a well it sank, that forest green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under its weight of forest⁠—more remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than one ship in a landlocked sea afloat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then through the narrowed sky some heavy bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would flap its way, a stillness more profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following its languid wings. Sometimes I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off in the long woods with quiet sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sudden chestnut thumping to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the dry leaf that drifted past upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its endless loiter earthward and was gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The next⁠ ⁠… I heard twigs splintering on my right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rustling in the thickets. Turning there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I watched. Out of the foliage came in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The head and blundering shoulders of a bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glistening in sable black, with beady stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of eyes towards me, and no room to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—But padding soft and slow the beast came by.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And⁠—mark their flattery⁠—stood and rubbed his flank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against me. On my shaken legs I felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart beat. And my hand that stroked him sank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrist-deep upon his shoulder in soft pelt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes⁠ ⁠… and across my spirit as I smelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wild thing’s scent, a new, sweet wildness ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering of Eden-fields long lost by man.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“So far was well. But then came emerald birds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing about y head. I took my way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sauntering the cloistered woods. Then came the herds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roebuck and the fallow deer at play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trooping to nose my hand. All this, you say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sweet? Oh, sweet!⁠ ⁠… do you think I could not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That beats and wood were nothing else but me?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“… That I was making everything I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too sweet, far too well fitted to desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be a living thing? Those forests draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sap from the kind earth: the solar fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soft rain feed them not: that fairy brier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pricks not: the birds sing sweetly in that brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for their own delight but for my sake!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“It is a world of sad, cold, heartless stuff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a bought smile, no joy in it.”⁠—“But stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did you not find your lady?”⁠—“Sure enough!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I still had hopes till then. The autumn day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was westering, the long shadows crossed my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When over daisies folded for the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath rook-gathering elms she came in sight.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“Was she not fair?”⁠—“So beautiful, she seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost a living soul. But every part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was what I made it⁠—all that I had dreamed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more, no less: the mirror of my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such things as boyhood feigns beneath the smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of solitude and spring. I was deceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost. In that first moment I believed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For a big, brooding rapture, tense as fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And calm as a first sleep, had soaked me through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without thought, without word, without desire⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile above our heads the deepening blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burnished the gathering stars. Her sweetness drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A veil before my eyes. The minutes passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy like loaded vines. She spoke at last.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“She said, for this land only did men love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadow-lands of earth. All our disease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of longing, all the hopes we fabled of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortunate islands or Hesperian seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or woods beyond the West, were but the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blew from off those shores: one far, spent breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That reached even to the world of change and death.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“She told me I had journeyed home at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the golden age and the good countrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had been always there. She bade me cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My cares behind forever:⁠—on her knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worshipped me, lord and love⁠—oh, I can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her red lips even now! Is it not wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men’s delusions should be made so strong?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For listen, I was so besotted now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She made me think that I was somehow seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very core of truth⁠ ⁠… I felt somehow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond all veils, the inward pulse of being.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought was enslaved, but oh, it felt like freeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And draughts of larger air. It is too much!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can come through untainted from that touch?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There I was nearly wrecked. But mark the rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She went too fast. Soft to my arms she came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The robe slipped from her shoulder The smooth breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was bare against my own. She shone like flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before me in the dusk, all love, all shame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faugh!⁠—and it was myself. But all was well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, at the least, that moment snapped the spell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As when you light a candle, the great gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which was the unbounded night, sinks down, compressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To four white walls in one familiar room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the vague joy shrank wilted in y breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And narrowed to one point, unmasked, confessed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fool’s paradise was gone: instead was there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Lust with his black, sudden, serious stare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“That moment in a cloud among the trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild music and the glare of torches came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On sweated faces, on the prancing knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shaggy satyrs fell the smoky flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On ape and goat and crawlers without name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On rolling breast, black eyes and tossing hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On old bald-headed witches, lean and bare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They beat the devilish tom-tom rub-a-dub;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lunging, leaping, in unwieldy romp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing Cotytto and Beelzebub,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With devil-dancers’ mask and phallic pomp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torn raw with briers and caked from many a swamp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They came, among the wild flowers dripping blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And churning the green mosses into mud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They sang, ‘Return! Return! We are the lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was before the world and still shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When your last law is trampled into dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are the mother swamp, the primal sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence the dry land appeared. Old, old are we.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is but a return⁠ ⁠… it’s nothing new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Easy as slipping on a well-worn shoe.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And then there came warm mouths and finger-tips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preying upon me, whence I could not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then⁠ ⁠… a huge face, low-browed, with swollen lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crooning, ‘I am not beautiful as she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I’m the older love; you shall love me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far more than Beauty’s self. You have been ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always. We are the world’s most ancient powers.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“First flatterer and then bogy⁠—like a dream!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir, are you listening? Do you also know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How close to the soft laughter comes the scream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down yonder?” But his host cried sharply, “No.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave me alone. Why will you plague me? Go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of my house! Begone!”⁠—“With all my heart,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Dymer. “But one word before we part.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He paused, and in his cheek the anger burned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turning to the table, he poured out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More water. But before he drank he turned⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then leaped back to the window with a shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there⁠—it was no dream⁠—beyond all doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw the Master crouch with levelled gun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cackling in maniac voice, “Run, Dymer, run!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-7-stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He ducked and sprang far out. The starless night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the web lawn closed round him every way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came the gun-crack and the splash of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanished as soon as seen. Cool garden clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slid from his feet. He had fallen and he lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Face downward among leaves⁠—then up and on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through branch and leaf till sense and breath were gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
