<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Even as he heard the wicket clash behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came a great wind beneath that seemed to tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solid graves apart; and deaf and blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whirled him upright, like smoke, through towering air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose levels were as steps of a sky stair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The parching cold roughened his throat with thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pricked him at the heart. This was the first.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as he soared into the next degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly all round him he could hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad strings that fretted inconsolably</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ominous horns that blew both far and near.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There broke his human heart, and his last tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Froze scalding on his chin. But while he heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shot like s sped dart into the third.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And its first stroke of silence could destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spring of tears forever and compress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off his lips the curved bow of the boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever. The sidereal loneliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received him, where no journeying leaves the less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still to be journeyed through: but everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast though you fly, the centre still is there.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And here the well-worn fabric of our life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell from him. Hope and purpose were cut short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Even the blind trust that reaches in mid-strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards some heart of things. Here blew the mort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the world spirit herself. The last support</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fallen away⁠—Himself, one spark of soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swam in unbroken void. He was the whole,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And wailing: “Why hast Thou forsaken me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was there no world at all, but only I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreaming of gods and men?” Then suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt the wind no more: he seemed to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faster than light but free, and scaled the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his own strength⁠—as if a falling stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should wake to find the world’s will was its own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And on the instant, straight before his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked and saw a sentry shape that stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning upon its spear, with hurrying skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind it and a moonset red as blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon its head were helmet and mailed hood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shield upon its arm and sword at thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All black and pointed sharp against the sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the clink of metal, the dry sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of steel on rock and challenge: “Who comes here?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he heard it, Dymer at one bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood in the stranger’s shadow, with the spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between them. And his human face came near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That larger face. “What watch is this you keep,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Dymer, “on edge of such a deep?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And answer came, “I watch both night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This frontier⁠ ⁠… there are beasts of the upper air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As beasts of the deep sea⁠ ⁠… one walks this way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night after night, far scouring from his lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chewing the cud of lusts which are despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fill not, while his mouth gapes dry for bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never was.”⁠—“What kind of beast is this?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“A kind of things escaped that have no home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hunters of men. They love the spring uncurled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The will worn down, the wearied hour. They come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At night-time when the mask is off the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the soul’s gate ill-locked and the flag furled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Then, softly, a pale swarm, and in disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flit past the drowsy watchman, small as flies.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“I’ll see this aerish beast whereof you speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll share the watch with you.”⁠—“Nay, little One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begone. You are of earth. The flesh is weak⁠ ⁠…”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“What is the flesh to me? My course is run,<br/></span>
					<br/>
					<span>All but some deed still waiting to be done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some moment I may rise on, as the boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifts with the lifting tide and steals afloat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You are a spirit, and it is well with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am come out of great folly and shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sack of cities, wrongs I must undo⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me of the beast, and whence it came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who were its sire and dam? What is its name?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“It is my kin. All monsters are the brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven and earth, and mixed with holy blood.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“How can this be?”⁠—“My son, sit here awhile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a lady in that primal place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I was born, who with her ancient smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made glad the sons of heaven. She loved to chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The springtime round the world. To all your race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was a sudden quivering in the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a new thought springing in solitude.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Till, in prodigious hour, one swollen with youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind from new-broken prison, knowing not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself nor her, nor how to mate with truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay with her in a strange and secret spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mortal with her immortal, and begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This walker-in-the-night.”⁠—“But did you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This mortal’s name?”⁠—“Why⁠ ⁠… it was long ago.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And yet, I think, I near the name in mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was some famished boy whom tampering men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had crippled in their chains and made him blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till their weak hour discovered them: and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He broke that prison. Softly!⁠—it comes again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have it. It was Dymer, little One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dymer’s the name. This spectre is his son.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, after silence, came an answering shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Dymer, glad and full: “Break off! Dismiss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your watch is ended and your lamp is out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unarm, unarm. Return into your bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You are relieved, Sir. I must deal with this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in my right. For either I must slay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This beast or else be slain before the day.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“So mortal and so brave?” that other said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling, and turned and looked in Dymer’s eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scanning him over twice from heel to head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Like an old sergeant’s glance, grown battle-wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know the points of men. At last, “Arise,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, “and wear my arms. I can withhold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing; for such an hour has been foretold.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat, with lips as cold as the sea-surge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kissed the youth, and bending on one knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put all his armour off and let emerge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angelic shoulders marbled gloriously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feet like frozen speed and, plain to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his wide breast dark wounds and ancient scars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The battle honours of celestial wars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then like a squire or brother born he dressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young man in those plates, that dripped with cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the inside, trickling over breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shoulder: but without, the figured gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave to the tinkling ice its jagged hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the icy spear froze fast to Dymer’s hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where the other had stood he took his stand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And searched the cloudy landscape. He could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dim shapes like hills appearing, but the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sunk behind their backs. “When will it be?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Dymer: and the other, “Soon now, soon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For either he comes past us at night’s noon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else between the night and the full day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down there, on your left, will be his way.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>—“Swear that you will not come between us two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor help me by a hair’s weight if I bow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—“If you are he, if prophecies speak true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not heaven and all the gods can help you now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This much I have been told, but know not how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fight will end. Who knows? I cannot tell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir, be content,” said Dymer. “I know well.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Dymer stood to arms, with eyes that ranged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through aching darkness: stared upon it, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all things, as he looked upon them, changed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were not as at first. But grave and slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The larger shade went sauntering to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humming at first the snatches of some tune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soldiers sing, but falling silent soon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then came steps of dawn. And though they heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No milking cry in the fields, and no cock crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out of empty air no twittering bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounded from neighbouring hedges, yet they knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eastward the hollow blackness paled to blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then blue to white: and in the West the rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surviving stars blinked feebler in cold air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For beneath Dymer’s feet the sad half-light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discovering the new landscape oddly came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forms grown half familiar in the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked strange again: no distance seemed the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now he could see clear and call by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Valleys and hills and woods. The phantoms all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took shape, and made a world, at morning’s call.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dumer-chapter-9-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was a ruinous land. The ragged stumps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of broken trees rose out of endless clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked of flower and grass: the slobbered humps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dividing the dead pools. Against the grey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shattered village gaped. But now the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was very near them and the night was past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dymer understood and spoke at last.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now I have wooed and won you, bridal earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful world that lives, desire of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that the spirit intended at my birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day shall be born into deed⁠ ⁠… and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hard day’s labour comes no more again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever. The pain dies. The longings cease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ship glides under the green arch of peace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now drink me as the sun drinks up the mist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the hour to cease in, at full flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That asks no gift form following years⁠—but, hist!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look yonder! At the corner of that wood⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look! Look there where he comes! It shocks the blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first sight, eh? Now, sentinel, stand clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And save yourself. For God’s sake come not near.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His full-grown spirit had moved without command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or spur of the will. Before he knew, he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was leaping forward spear in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where that ashen brute wheeled slowly round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nosing, and set its ears towards the sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pale and heavy brute, rough-ridged behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of eyes, clinking in scaly rind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now ten paces parted them: and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He halted. He thrust forward his left foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poising his straightened arms, and launched the spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gloriously it sang. But now the brute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lurched forward: and he saw the weapon shoot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond it and fall quivering on the field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dymer drew out his sword and raised the shield.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What now my friends? You get no more from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dymer. He goes from us. What he felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or saw from henceforth no man knows but he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has himself gone through the jungle belt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dying, into peace. That angel knelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off and watched them close but could not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their battle. All was ended suddenly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A leap⁠—a cry⁠—flurry of steel and claw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then silence. As before, the morning light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the same brute crouched yonder; and he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under its feet, broken and bent and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruined limbs of Dymer, killed outright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in a moment, all his story done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>… But that same moment came the rising sun;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thirty miles to westward, the grey cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flushed into answering pink. Long shadows streamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From every hill, and the low-hanging shroud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mist along the valleys broke and steamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold-flecked to heaven. Far off the armour gleamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like glass upon the dead man’s back. But now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sentinel ran forward, hand to brow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And staring. For between him and the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw that country clothed with dancing flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where flower had never grown; and one by one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The splintered woods, as if from April showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were softening into green. In the leafy towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose the cool, sudden chattering on the tongues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happy birds with morning in their lungs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The wave of flowers came breaking round his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crocus and bluebell, primrose, daffodil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shivering with moisture: and the air grew sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his nostrils, changing heart and will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making him laugh. He looked, and Dymer still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay dead among the flowers and pinned beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brute: but as he looked he held his breath;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chanter-9-stanza-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For when he had gazed hard with steady eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the brute, behold, no brute was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But someone towering large against the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wing’d and sworded shaped, whose foam-like hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay white about its shoulders, and the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That came from it was burning hot. The whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pure body brimmed with life, as a full bowl.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-9-stanza-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And from the distant corner of day’s birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard clear trumpets blowing and bells ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noise of great good coming into earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a music as the dumb would sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Balder had led back the blameless spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With victory, with the voice of charging spears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in white lands long-lost Saturnian years.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
