<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dymer-chapter-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h4><span epub:type="label">Canto</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span></h4>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Through bearded cliffs a valley has driven thus deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its wedge into the mountain and no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faint track of farthest-wandering sheep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ends here, and the grey hollows at their core</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silence feel the dulled continuous roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of higher streams. At every step the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow less and in their place black ridges rise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hither, long after noon, with plodding tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eyes on earth, grown dogged, Dymer came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all the long day in the woods had fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the horror of those lips that screamed his name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cursed him. Busy wonder and keen shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were driving him, and little thoughts like bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed and pricked him on and left no ease.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when he looked and saw this emptiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven times enfolded in the idle hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a chilly pause to his distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloud of the deep world-despair that fills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man's heart like the incoming tide and kills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pains except its own. In that broad sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hope, no change, and no regret can be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He felt the eternal strength of the silly earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unhastening circuit of the stars and sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The business of perpetual death and birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meaningless precision. All must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same and still the same in each degree—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cared now? And the smiled and could forgive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believing that for sure he would not live.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, where he saw a little water run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath a bush, he slept. The chills of May</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came dropping and the stars peered one by one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the deepening blue, while far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The western brightness dulled to bars of grey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-way to midnight, suddenly, from dreaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He woke wide into present horror, screaming.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For he had dreamt of being in the arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his beloved and in quiet places;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all at once it filled with night alarms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rapping guns: and men with splintered faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—No eyes, no nose, all red—were running races</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With worms along the floor. And he ran out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find the girl and shouted: and that shout</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Had carried him into the waking world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There stood the concave, vast, unfriendly night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over him the scroll of stars unfurled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wailing like a child he rose upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart-sick with desolation. The new blight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of loss had nipt him sore, and sad self-pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking of her—then thinking of the City.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For, in each moment's thought, the deed of Bran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The burning and the blood and his own shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would tease him into madness till he ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For refuge to the thought of her; whence came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Utter and endless loss—no, not a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a word, nothing left—himself alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crying amid that valley of old stone:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"How soon it all ran out! And I suppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They, they up there, the old contriving powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They knew it all the time—for someone knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waits and watches till we pluck the flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then leaps. So soon—my store of happy hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All gone before I knew. I have expended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My whole wealth in a day. It's finished, ended.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"And nothing left. Can it be possible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That joy flows through and, when the course is run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It leaves no change, no mark on us to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its passing? And as poor as we've begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We end the richest day? What we have won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can it all die like this?… Joy flickers on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The razor-edge of the present and is gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"What have I done to bear upon my name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curse of Bran? I was not of his crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor any man's. And Dymer has the blame—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What have I done? Wronged whom? I never knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What's Bran to me? I had my deed to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ran out by myself, alone and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Why should earth sing with joy and not for me?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah, but the earth never did sing for joy…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a glamour on the leaf and flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And April comes and whistles to a boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over white fields: and, beauty has such power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon us, he believes her in that hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who could not believe? Can it be false,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that the blackbird says and the wind calls?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"What have I done? No living thing I made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wished to suffer harm. I sought my good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the spring was gloriously arrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the blue eyebright misted all the wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to obey that springtime and my blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was to be unarmed and off my guard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave God time to hit once and hit hard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"The men built right who made that City of ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They knew their world. A man must crouch to face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infinite malice, watching at all hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut Nature out—give her no moment's space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For entry. The first needs of all our race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are walls, a den, a cover. Traitor I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who first ran out beneath the open sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Our fortress and fenced place I made to fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I slipt the sentries and let in the foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have lost my brothers and my love and all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing is left but me. Now let me go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen the world stripped naked and I know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great God, take back your world. I will have none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all your glittering gauds but death alone."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meaning the earth swung round in hollow night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls without number in all nations slept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snug on her back, safe speeding towards the light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hours tolled, and in damp woods the night beast crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over the long seas the watch was kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In black ships, twinkling onward, green and red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always the ordered stars moved overhead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And no one knew that Dymer in his scales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had weighed all these and found them nothing worth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indifferently the dawn that never fails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troubled the east of night with gradual birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering a change of colours on cold earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a bird woke, then two. The sunlight ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the hills and yellow day began.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But stagnant gloom clung in the valley yet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hills crowded out a third part of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black-looking, and the boulders dripped with wet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bird sang. Dymer, shivering, heaved a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yawned and said: "It's cruel work to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yawned and said: "It's cruel work to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hunger"; and again, with cloudy breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blown between chattering teeth, "It's a bad death."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He crouched and clasped his hands about his knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hugged his own limbs for the pitiful sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of homeliness they had—familiars these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This body, at least, his own, his last defence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon his morning misery drove him thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eating his heart, to wander as chance led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On, upward, to the narrowing gully's head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The cloud lay on the nearest mountain-top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from a giant's chimney smoking there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Dymer took no heed. Sometimes he'd stop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes he hurried faster, as despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pricked deeper, and cried out: "Even now, somewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bran with his crew's at work. They rack, they burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there's no help in me. I've served their turn."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile the furrowed fog rolled down ahead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long tatters of its vanguard smearing round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bases of the crags. Like cobweb shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down the deep combes it dulled the tinkling sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of waters on the hills. The spongy ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded three yards ahead: then nearer yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell the cold wreaths, the white depth gleaming wet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then after a long time the path he trod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led downward. Then all suddenly it dipped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far steeper, and yet steeper, with smooth sod.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was half running now. A stone that slipped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath him, rattled headlong down: he tripped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stumbled and clutched—then panic, and no hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stop himself, once lost upon that slope.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And faster, ever faster, and his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught tree-tops far below. The nightmare feeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had gripped him. He was screaming: and the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed hanging upside down. Then struggling, reeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With effort beyond thought he hung half kneeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Halted one saving moment. With wild will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He clawed into the hillside and lay still,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chaper-5-stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Half hanging on both arms. His idle feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dangled and found no hold. The moor lay wet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against him and he sweated with the heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of terror, all alive. His teeth were set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"By God, I will not die," said he; "not yet."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then slowly, slowly, with enormous strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heaved himself an inch: then heaved again,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stamza-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Till saved and spent he lay. He felt indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was the big, round world beneath his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mother planet proven at this need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shame of glad surrender stood confessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cared not for his boasts. This, this was best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This giving up of all. He need not strive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He panted, he lay still, he was alive.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now his eyes were closed. Perhaps he slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lapt in unearthly quiet—never knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How bit by bit the fog's white rearguard crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the crest and faded, and the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First brightening at the zenith trembled through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deepening shadows took a sharper form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each moment, and the sandy earth grew warm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, dreaming of blue skies, in dream he heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pure voice of lark that seemed to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its song from heights beyond all height. That bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang out heaven, "The world will never end,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang from the gates of heavens, "Will never end."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang till it seemed there was no other thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bright space and one voice set there to sing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It seemed to be the murmur and the voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or beings beyond number, each and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing <strong>I am</strong>. Each of itself made choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was: whence flows the justice that men call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine. She keeps the great worlds lest they fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hour to hour, and makes the hills renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ancient youth and sweetens all things through.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It seemed to be the low voice of the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brooding alone beneath the strength of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Murmuring of days and nights and years unfurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever, and the unwearied joy that brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of old fields the flowers of unborn springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of old wars and cities burned with wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A splendour in the dark, a tale, a song.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The dream ran thin towards waking, and he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was but a bird's piping with no sense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rolled round on his back. The sudden blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quivering with light, heard, cloudless and intense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shone over him. The lark still sounded thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stirred him at the heart. Some spacious thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was passing by too gently to be caught.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With that he thrust the damp hair from his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sat upright. The perilous cliff dropped sheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him, close at hand, and from his place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listening in mountain silence he could hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birds crying far below. It was not fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That took him, but strange glory, when his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked past he edge into surrounding sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dymer-chapter-5-stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He rose and stood. Then lo! the world beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Wide pools that in the sun-splashed foothills lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sheep-doted downs, soft-piled, and rolling heath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>River and shining weir and steeples grey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the green waves of forest. Far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distance rose heaped on distance: nearer hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white roads leading down to a new land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
