<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV: In Praise of Solid People</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="spirits-in-bondage-part-2" id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-24" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h4>
				<p epub:type="title">In Praise of Solid People</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Thank God that there are solid folk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who water flowers and roll the lawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sit and sew and talk and smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snore all through the summer dawn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who pass untroubled nights and days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-fed and sleepily content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing and each other’s praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Respectable and innocent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who feel the things that all men feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think in well-worn grooves of thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose honest spirits never reel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before man’s mystery, overwrought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet not unfaithful nor unkind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With work-day virtues surely staid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Theirs is the sane and humble mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dull affections undismayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O happy people! I have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No verse yet written in your praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, truth to tell, the time has been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would have scorned your easy ways.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now thro’ weariness and strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I learn your worthiness indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world is better for such life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As stout suburban people lead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too often have I sat alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the wet night falls heavily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fretting winds around me moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And homeless longing vexes me</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For lore that I shall never know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And visions none can hope to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till brooding works upon me so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A childish fear steals over me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I look around the empty room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clock still ticking in its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all else silent as the tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till suddenly, I think, a face</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grows from the darkness just beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I turn, and lo! it fades away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon another phantom tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shifting dreams begins to play,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And dusky galleys past me sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full freighted on a faerie sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear the silken merchants hail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the ringing waves to me</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—Then suddenly, again, the room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Familiar books about me piled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I alone amid the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one more mocking dream beguiled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And still no neared to the Light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still no further from myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone and lost in clinging night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—(The clock’s still ticking on the shelf).</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then do I envy solid folk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sit of evenings by the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After their work and doze and smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are not fretted by desire.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
