<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h5 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="title">Satan Speaks</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I am the Lord your God: even he that made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Material things, and all these signs arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above you and have set beneath the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mankind, who forget their Father’s face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even while they drink my light of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dream of some other gods and disobey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My warnings, and despise my holy laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even tho’ their sin shall slay them. For which cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams dreamed in vain, a never-filled desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in close flesh a spiritual fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thirst for good their kind shall not attain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A backward cleaving to the beast again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A loathing for the life that I have given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A haunted, twisted soul for ever riven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between their will and mine⁠—such lot I give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White still in my despite the vermin live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hate my world! Then let that other God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come from the outer spaces glory-shod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from this castle I have built on Night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steal froth my own thought’s children into light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If such an one there be. But far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He walks the airy fields of endless day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my rebellious sons have called Him long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vainly called. My order still is strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like to me nor second none I know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wither the mammoth went this creature too shall go.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
