<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h5 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="title">The Philosopher</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Who shall be our prophet then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chosen from all the sons of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead his fellows on the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hidden knowledge, delving deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To nameless mysteries that keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their secret form the solar day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or who shall pierce with surer eye!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This shifting veil of bittersweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find the real things that lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond this turmoil, which we greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a wasted wealth of tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shall cross over for us the bridge of fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pass in to the country where the ancient Mothers dwell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it an elder, bent and hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, where the waste Atlantic swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh lonely beaches makes its roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his solitary tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the long night hour by hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pores on old books with watery eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all his youth has passed him by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And folly is schooled and love is dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And frozen fancy laid abed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in his veins the gradual blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slackens to a marish flood?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he rejoiceth not in the ocean’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither the sun giveth delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the moon by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall call his feet to wander in the haunted forest lawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall no more rise suddenly in the dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When mists are white and the dew lies pearly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold and cold on every meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take his joy of the season early,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The opening flower and the westward shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarcely can he dream of laughter and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lie so many leaden years behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such eyes are dim and blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sad, aching head that nods above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His monstrous books can never know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The secret we would find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let our seer be young and kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fresh and beautiful of show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taken ere the lustyhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rapture of his youth be dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the gnawing, peasant reason</span>
				<br/>
				<span>School him over-deep in treason</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ancient high estate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his fancy’s principate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may live a perfect whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mask of the eternal soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cross at last the shadowy bar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the ever-living are.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
