<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIX: World’s Desire</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="spirits-in-bondage-part-3" id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-39" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h4>
				<p epub:type="title">World’s Desire</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Love, there is a castle built in a country desolate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a rock above a forest where the trees are grim and great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blasted with the lightning sharp⁠—giant boulders strewn between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mountains rise above, and the cold ravine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoes to the crushing roar and thunder of a mighty river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raging down a cataract. Very tower and forest quiver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the grey wolves are afraid and the call of birds is drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the thought and speech of man in the boiling water’s sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But upon the further side of the barren, sharp ravine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sunlight on its turrets is the castle seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm and very wonderful, white above the green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wet and waving forest, slanted all away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the driving Northern wind will not rest by night or day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet the towers are sure above, very mighty is the stead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates are made of ivory, the roofs of copper red.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Round and round the warders grave walk upon the walls for ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wakeful dragons couch in the ports of ivory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing is can trouble it, hate of the gods nor man’s endeavour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it shall be a resting-place, dear heart, for you and me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through the wet and waving forest with an age-old sorrow laden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing of the world’s regret wanders wild the faerie maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thistle and the brier, through the tangles of the thorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her eyes be dim with weeping and her homeless feet are torn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often to the castle gate up she looks with vain endeavour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her soulless loveliness to the castle winneth never.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But within the sacred court, hidden high upon the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering in the castle gardens lovely folk enough there be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathing in another air, drinking of a purer fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And among that folk, beloved, there’s a place for you and me.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
