<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-33" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h5 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="title">How He Saw Angus the God</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I heard the swallow sing in the eaves and rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in a strange delight while others slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down the creaking stair, alone, tip-toes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So carefully I crept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The house was dark with silly blinds yet drawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But outside the clean air was filled with light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And underneath my feet the cold, wet lawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With dew was twinkling bright.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cobwebs hung from every branch and spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleaming with pearly strands of laden thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And long and still the morning shadows lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across the meadows spread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At that pure hour when yet no sound of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirs in the whiteness of the wakening earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone through innocent solitudes I ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singing aloud for mirth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till I had found the open mountain heath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yellow with gorse, and rested there and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gaze upon the misty sea beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or on the neighbouring wood,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—That little wood of hazel and tall pine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And youngling fir, where oft we have loved to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The level beams of early morning shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freshly from tree to tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through the denser wood there’s many a pool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of deep and night-born shadow lingers yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the new-wakened flowers are damp and cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the long grass is wet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>in the sweet heather long I rested there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking upon the dappled , early sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When suddenly, from out the shining air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A god came flashing by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swift, naked, eager, pitilessly fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a live crown of birds about his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing and fluttering, and his fiery hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far out behind him spread,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Streamed like a rippling torch upon the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his own glorious swiftness: in the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bruised no feathery stalk, and through the trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw his whiteness pass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when I followed him beyond the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! He was changed into a solemn bull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there upon the open pasture stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And browsed his lazy full.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
