<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h5 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="title">Dungeon Grates</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>So piteously the lonely soul of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shudders before this universal plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So grievous is the burden and the pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So heavy weighs the long, material chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cause to cause, too merciless for hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nightmare march of unrelenting fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think that he must die thereof unless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever and again across the dreariness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came a sudden glimpse of spirit faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fragrant breath to tell of flowery places</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wider oceans, breaking on the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which the hearts of men are always sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lies beyond endeavour; neither prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor fasting, nor much wisdom winneth there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing how many prophets and wise men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have sought for it and still returned again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hope undone. But only the strange power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of unsought Beauty in some casual hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can build a bridge of light or sound or form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead you out of all this strife and storm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When of some beauty we are grown a part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till from its very glory's midmost heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out leaps a sudden beam of larger light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into our souls. All things are seen aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the blinding pillar of its gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven times more true than what for truth we hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vulgar hours. The miracle is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for one little moment we are one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the eternal stream of loveliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flows so calm, aloft from all distress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet leaps and lives around us as a fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making us faint with overstrong desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sport and swim for ever in its deep—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a moment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">O! but we shall keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our vision still. One moment was enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know we are not made of mortal stuff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we can bear all trials that come after,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hate of men and the fool's loud bestial laughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nature's rule and cruelties unclean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we have seen the Glory—we have seen.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
