<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV: Song of the Pilgrims</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-25" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song of the Pilgrims</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O Dwellers at the back of the North Wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What have we done to you? How have we sinned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering the Earth from Orkney unto Ind?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With many deaths our fellowship is thinned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our flesh is withered in the parching wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering the earth from Orkney unto Ind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We have no rest. We cannot turn again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the world and all her fruitless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having once sought the land where ye remain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some say ye are not. But, ah God! we know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That somewhere, somewhere past the Northern snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for us the red-rose gardens blow:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—The red-rose and the white-rose gardens blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the green Northern land to which we go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely the ways are long and the years are slow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We have forsaken all things sweet and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have found nothing worth a moment’s care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the real flowers are blowing there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Land of the Lotus fallen from the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land of the Lake from whence all rivers run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land where the hope of all our dreams is won!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall we not somewhere see at close of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green walls of that country far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear the music of her fountains play?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So long we have been wandering all this while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By many a perilous sea and drifting isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We scarce shall dare to look thereon and smile.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yea, when we are drawing very near to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at last the ivory port we see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hearts will faint with mere felicity:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But we shall wake again in gardens bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of green and gold for infinite delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeping beneath the solemn mountains white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from the flowery copses still unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing out the crooning birds that ne’er have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched by the hand of winter frore and lean;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ever living queens that grow not old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poets wise in robes of faerie gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whisper a wild, sweet song that first was told</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ere God sat down to make the Milky Way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in those gardens we shall sleep and play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever and for ever and a day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An, Dwellers at the back of the North Wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What have we done to you? How have we sinned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That yes should hide beyond the Northern wind?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Land of the Lotus, fallen from the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When shall your hidden, flowery vales be won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the travail of our way be done?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Very far we have searched; we have even seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Scythian waste that bears no soft nor green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near the Hideous Pass our feet have been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We have heard Syrens singing all night long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the unknown stars their lonely song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In friendless seas beyond the Pillars strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor by the dragon-daughter of Hypocras</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the vale of the Devil’s head we have feared to pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet is our labour lost and vain, alas!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scouring the earth from Orkney unto Ind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossed on the seas and withered in the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We seek and seek your land. How have we sinned?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or is it all a folly of the wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidding us walk these ways with blinded eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all around us real flowers arise?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, by the very God, we know, we know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That somewhere still, beyond the Northern snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for us the red-rose gardens blow.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
