<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII: De Profundis</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">De Profundis</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Come let us curse our Master ere we die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all our hopes in endless ruin lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good is dead. Let us curse God most High.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Four thousand years of toil and hope and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein man laboured upward and still wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New worlds and better, Thou hast made as naught.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We built us joyful cities, strong and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowledge we sought and gathered wisdom rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all this time you laughed upon our care,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And suddenly the earth grew black with wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hope was crushed and silenced was our song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heaven grew loud with weeping. Thou art strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Come then and curse the Lord. Over the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gross darkness falls, and evil was our birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our few happy days of little worth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even if it be not all a dream in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient hope that still will rise again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a just God that cares for earthly pain,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet far away beyond our labouring night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wanders in the depths of endless light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing alone his musics of delight;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only the far, spent echo of his song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our dungeons and deep cells can smite along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thou art nearer. Thou art very strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O universal strength, I know it well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is but froth of folly to rebel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou art Lord and hast the keys of Hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet I will not bow down to thee nor love thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For looking in my own heart I can prove thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And know this frail, bruised being is above thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our love, our hope, our thirsting for the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our mercy and long seeking of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we change these for thy relentless might?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Laugh then and slay. Shatter all things of worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap torment still on torment for thy mirth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art not Lord while there are Men on earth.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
