<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII: The Ass</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-27" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Ass</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I woke and rose and slipt away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heathery hills in the morning grey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In a field where the dew lay cold and deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I met an ass, new-roused from sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I stroked his nose and I tickled his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spoke soft words to quiet his fears</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His eyes stared into the eyes of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he kissed my hands of his courtesy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O big, brown brother out of the waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How do thistles for breakfast taste?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And do you rejoice in the dawn divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a heart that is glad no less than mine?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For, brother, the depth of your gentle eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is strange and mystic as the skies:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What are the thoughts that grope behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in the mist of a donkey mind?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Can it be true, as the wise men tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you are a mask of God as well,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And, as in us, so in you no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks the eternal Loveliness,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And words of the lips that all things know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the thoughts of a donkey go?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“However it be, O four-foot brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair to-day is the earth, our mother.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“God send you peace and delight thereof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all green meat of the waste you love,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And guard you well from violent men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who’d put you back in the shafts again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the ass had far too wise a head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To answer one of the things I said,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So he twitched his fair ears up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned to nuzzle his shoulder brown.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
