<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="spirits-in-bondage-chapter-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h5 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="title">Ode for New Year’s Day</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Woe unto you, ye sons of pain that are this day in earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now cry for all your torment: now curse your hour of birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fathers who begat your to a portion nothing worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thou, my own beloved, for as brave as ere thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bow down thine head, Despoina, clasp thy pale arms over it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie low with fast-closed eyelids, clenched teeth, enduring heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sorrow on sorrow is coming wherein all flesh has part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky above is sickening, the clouds of God’s hate cover it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Body and soul shall suffer beyond all word or thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the pain and noisy terror that these first years have wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem but the soft arising and prelude of the storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fiercer still and heavier with sharper lightnings fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall pour red wrath upon us over a world deform</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thrice happy, O Despoina, were the men who were alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great age and the golden age when still the cycle ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On upward curve and easily, for them both maid and man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beast and tree and spirit in the green earth could thrive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now one age is ending, and God calls home the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looses the wheel of the ages and sends it spinning back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the death of nations, and points a downward track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And madness is come over us and great and little wars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has not left one valley, one isle of fresh and green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where old friends could forgather amid the howling wreck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s vainly we are praying. We cannot, cannot check</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Power who slays and puts aside the beauty that has been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It’s truth they tell, Despoina, none hears the eart’s complaining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Nature will not pity, nor the red God lend an ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I too have been mad in the hour of bitter paining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted up my voice to God, thinking that he could hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The curse wherewith I cursed Him because the Good wad dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lo! I am grown wiser, knowing that our own hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have made a phantom called the Good, while a few years have sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a little planet. And what should the great Lord know of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tosses the dust of chaos and gives the suns their parts?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither he moves them; for an hour we see the show of it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a little hour, and the life of the race is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here he builds a nebula, and there he slays a sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And works his own fierce pleasure. All things he shall fulfill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And O, my poor Desponina, do you think he ever hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wail of hearts he has broken, the sounds of human ill?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cares not for our virtues, our little hopes and fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how could it all go on, love, if he knew of laughter and tears?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, sweet, if a man could cheat him! If you could flee away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into some other country beyond the rosy West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hide in the deep forests and be for ever at rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rankling hate of God and the outworn world’s decay!</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
